CHAPTER I:	EXHORTATION, OR LECTURE, TO RISING YOUNG PAINTERS

1. O Hebe's offspring, Genius's students,1 
who instead of writing, 
blotted all over your paper and filled it
with little People, Ships, and various animals
so that you scarcely left a space empty:2 
It seems that Nature wished to drive you 
to become a painter, such that your Parents 
assume the burden of bringing you there.
Parents easily say that they want to make their children Painters, but it is neither their task, nor within their power. 

2. By general judgment you were chosen 
to be a Painter. The word is easy to speak, 
but look: between Painter and Painter
lies a great mountain, rising so high 
that many must leave the journey stalled.
This does not concern months or weeks; 
rather, you will need whole years
before you taste any benefit.
Between painter and painter lies a great mountain.

3.  It would not be good if one pushed you to this.	
This Art is itself attractive enough at the start, 
easy to grasp, at everyone's command. 
But let each make sure to avoid the fate of 
the foolish gnat, who, delighting in the shine 
of the gleaming candlelight, goes to his ruin	
foolishly inclined to fly into it; 
for  many deceive themselves in this way. 
The art of painting is alluring, but difficult to learn.


4. Be warned, then, for the throat of Art 
sweetly mimics the voices of the Sirens 
and pleasantly lures each one to the performance; 
but in order to reach her one must attempt 
many paths and swim through waters; 
then there is a mountain to climb,
so high that you do not reach the top, early or late, 
unless you have the benefit of nature.
Without nature, one cannot become a painter.


5.  Because nature has on many heights
a gallery or passage, in which lie 
all instruments of art and craft.
All young children go through here
even before they suckle at their Mother's breast, 
and here, generous nature hands 
each one a particular instrument 
in order to earn his bread in the countries of the World.
Nature inclines every child to something particular.  


6. Various and precious are her gifts:	
here she gives ploughs, there hammers, there axes, 
here trowels, there books, over there brushes,
but often the unknowing parents
distribute the natural characters 
and so, alas, sometimes it arises 
that a born painter walks behind the plow, 
and farmers devote themselves to the brush.
Parents ought to pay careful attention to the inclinations of their children, according to Plato, writing in the third dialogue of his Republic.3


7. If nature does not offer you the brush, 
then you must in time turn back
and let your fruitless desires die, 
and so save time and money, 
not ruining yourself like the gnat mentioned above.
The bridge will be too long and narrow for you; 
There is less shame in stopping at the beginning 
than in falling at the end.


8. If nature is friendly toward you, 
people will quickly judge the character of your mind; 
for everyone, from the cradle, 
must begin to strangle snakes, [and] later overcome 
the lions of Nemea and monsters of Crete 
or many-headed hydras of Lerna, with perilous bites, 
Cacuses, Cerberuses and cruel Centaurs, 
to have their heads crowned with green laurels.4
It is evident early if someone will become a good painter.


9. Plants which we call thistles or nettles
sting and burn early when they newly grow; 
likewise, wood that shall eventually be a hook
must begin to bend right away.
Thus, in short, the youths called to the art of painting5	 
who later wish to fly over the common limits 
must rise up early
and begin to overtake the others.

10. Though if nature drives you to such paths that you,
with a skilled and aspiring mind,
have received such a part of her hand 
that you feel countless ideas 
coming alive in  your spirit, sense and inclination, 
I will not dissuade you from competing for the prize,
because, through the adventure,
you might succeed in the end. 

11. But let nothing distress you; 
he who persists may hope for victory. 
After the effort comes enjoyment.	
Here sits a Popinjay
which scarcely one in a hundred can hit; 6 
So it is that Art is always exalted, like an Ethiopian 
Eastern pearl of very great worth.
Out of a hundred, scarcely one will reach perfection.


12. Nature sometimes gives her gifts of painting 
where there is neither the time nor means for learning, 
but where the need pushes one to earn a living,
so that such a noble spirit must remain buried
like a hidden treasure; that is a shame. 
Yet when the·gift and the means combine
with practice, inclination and enduring industry, 
then the work brings about pleasant profit.


13. Now then, you young Painterly souls,
let go of all useless childish presumptions; 
if you wish to enter the precincts of this Art, 
you must have a devoted and steadfast love for her, 
because she is jealous and must be very well served.	
Do not cling to your featherbed; 
you must shun sleepy idleness 
as well as the bottle of Bacchus and the arrows of Cupid.
Art is jealous; thus one should avoid whatever is contrary to her. 


14. Always choose fellow-pupils 
from among those who exert themselves with eager diligence,
however fine the weather is, if it thaws or freezes; 
who try never to lose time with easygoing fair-weather friends.
Suffer for a little in order not to suffer forever.
Offer time your time, do not squander time’s time;
deny time your time, and time will steal your time. 

15. Coornhert, a poet, industrious in his way of life,
had a widely-used saying he often spoke 
to those who did nothing 
but waste their time excessively: 
"They have too much of what I have too little,
yet we actually have the same amount,"
by which he apparently meant the time that he, active in many areas, 
tried to win with diligence, so that he was always short of time.
Proverb by Coornhert.


16. There are certainly more of the time-poor sort,
who want to split each interval into three,
practicing making time out of no time.
But one also finds those who always have a great deal of time,
however recklessly they spend it;
so they carelessly throw it away 
on Pots, Cups, Golfing and Ball-playing
because they care nothing for its worth.
This was once portrayed ingeniously by Goltzius.


Nevertheless (alas) what shall we lack more, 
finally, than precious time, 
when we must leave this earthly nest?
The present time is now at hand, 
but yesterday is forever past
and tomorrow uncertain: no one can say
he knows if he will reach tomorrow. 
In sum, time surpasses all riches.
How precious time is.


18. But people find it less significant 
to while away time with song, lutes and harps,
taking walks for the digestion, 
or what is called sharpening the senses,
than to let go of gold or silver, 
which really are worth less than time 
and its favorable opportunity 
which, once it has once flown by, we can never get back.
Time and occasion, or the favorable point in time, once gone, can never be retrieved.

19.  Thus the loss of time is a great damage,
repaired with neither goods nor money.
So, children, be more frugal with time than with gold
and drive away laziness, which is 
the mother of all evil and the nurse of poverty;
then further, every evil brings its own rod 
for just punishment, and is not afraid 
to strike at its instigator or master.
Idleness, the mother of all evil and the nurse of poverty.  
Every evil brings its own punishment.


20. The drunkard falls in the muddy gutter 
And, being needy, must endure much discomfort. 
And what proceeds from drunkenness 
but all shameful and dreadful actions 
which are to be regretted in a sober condition; 
in particular the irreparable act of murder, 
when man's hands grip and break 
the work of God, which no one can repair. 
On the sin of drunkenness and the evils it causes.


21.  See what this barley beer can cause;
how often it reduces men to pigs 
as we read of Ulysses ' companions. 
But how much worse is fighting, 
and how very common it is, 
to arouse the praise of the foolish world, 
which in this regard calls the volatile ones valiant heroes
and, astonishingly, can blame the gentle ones.
Fighting, while praised by fools, is still a great shame.


22. Nevertheless (according to the words of the Wise)
he who fully masters his own heart
is much stronger and more praiseworthy than one who kills another. 
The word “murderer” makes everyone shudder;
the name “thief” is in many shameful ways distasteful.
To defend the thief I appeal to views that prevail in the law:
the thief can return what is stolen, 
but the murderer cannot wake the dead to life.


23. Thus drunkenness, with all its evil fruits
which would be too long and useless to relate,
O curious minds, you must flee without regret,
so that these false rumors about Artists
like "a painter is a lunatic" 
can sink to the bottom of the Styx,
and the popular proverb: "the more one is a painter, the more one is wild"
can change to "the more one is a painter, the more one is serene."
That young Painters must avoid drunkenness. The proverb "the more one is a painter, the more one is wild" must go.

24. However, it seems that some artists think
That art is enriched when the public says, "it is a pity
that this fine Mind, aside from his studies, 
is such a drunken, wild, and brutal
hothead and turns angry so easily.”
Yet this will cool many an ardent art-lover, 
and make some admirers less eager 
to teach their children the rules of art.
The foolish ambition of some Artists to be known for a wicked way of life. 

25. Do not be discouraged, noble young painters,
that some vines put forth bad fruit; 
to our sorrow, we hear tell
that the greatest Artists are the least virtuous,
for sometimes we can thank a single person
for tarnishing an entire tribe,
when he defies the noble Nature 
of the quiet, pure study of Painting.
False view that the greatest artists are the greatest scoundrels: since it is contrary to the nature of the art of painting

26. He is not worthy of being considered an "artist" 
who wastes Her noble spirit, 
like a savage, uncivilized, rude barbarian; 
for the reputation of Painters 
has always been singled out by Prators, 
Senators, Philosophers, Poets, 
Princes, and highly-placed Monarchs.
Those who lead an unruly life are not worthy of the name of artist.  Painters have always been beloved by princes and scholars.


27. He who with his skilled work can so sweetly seduce 
People’s eyes so that their spirits, from dwelling 
in their hearts, attach themselves to it,  
would also deserve to win the friendship of everyone
by being virtuous and honorable, which is an Art 
above all other Arts, in order to obtain good favor, 
grace and friendship, according to his heart's desire, 
from God and all People.
Just as the artful painter, with his work, lures People to look, 
he should live honorably with art, attracting each one to friendship. 


28. Among all who bear the name of Painter, 
noble courtesy should prevail, 
which can often move 
the hearts of Peasants and touch them 
with its decent and winning ways. 
In short, all ordered and kind
modesty must be especially included
in the name or the word painterly.
All modesty included in the word Painterly.


29. Thus painters, being Painterly,  
should therefore discard, flatten and drive out 
all envy, dispute and discord 
with gentle, wise, sensible words
and not with fighting, evil words and quarrelling, 
like Fishwives at the Market, 
who often rob one another’s reputations 
and throw baskets at one another’s heads.
Painters should not fight or quarrel but settle all disputes with wisdom.


30. Nor should one follow the example of the Wagoners, 
with whom courtesy is seldom encountered
and who hurt one another with fists and knives in their quarrels,
for ignorance is the mother of discord;
but the true nature of Art causes 
those who have risen in the Arts
to possess the greatest courtesy.
Ignorance is the mother of discord.


31. Since the Greeks’ and Romans’ Dedication
to Pictura spread with such fire 
that they forbade, with strict orders, 
anyone other than 
nobly-born children to be taught painting, 
it is fitting that, to honor Art, 
all virtue and courtesy should accompany 
those who follow the Noble Brush.
Read about the life of the Macedonian painter Pamphilus. Plutarch also says that Emilius Paulus, among other noble artists, taught his sons how to paint and sculpt.

32. Jove's daughters, the three Graces, 
were depicted with one seeming about to walk away 
with her back turned to you; and then 
there were two frontally depicted, at some distance.
This signifies that for a single act of friendship 
we receive two: hence courtesy 
should never slacken but be ever bolder,
to serve more profit everywhere.


33. There is no doubt that Apelles, the Prince of Painters, 
was modest and courteous, 
being able to charm Alexander so
that he came daily to see him at work. 
Also worth noting is his courtesy toward 
Protogenes, for whose Person and work
he brought great respect among the Rhodians,
as will follow, though not in rhyme.
Example of the civility of Apelles.

34. Raphael, too,  Foremost painter of his time: 
many good masters earned their wages
gladly in his company, 
working together free from envy, 
and none was unfriendly to another. 
The gracious Raphael seemed
to dispel vigorously 
all ignoble, vile thoughts from his spirit.  
Read of this in the life of Raphael.

35.  So henceforth  “the more one is a painter, the more one is serene.",”
not "the more one is a painter, the more one is wild;" 
those dark mists must be driven from the eyes and vanish, 
being so clearly and brightly illuminated 
by two such renowned, noble artists. 
So now, young Pictorialists, 
let each accustom himself so much to virtue
that he will understand the true nature of Art.


36. Two of the most important names, 
from antiquity and modern times, 
serve as Examples of how Art and courtesy 
should always belong together for Artists
if you wish to cross the threshold 
of the temple of immortal Fame;
otherwise you run great danger
of drowning in the river of Lethe. 
The fable is taken from Ariosto, Orlando Furioso, cantos 34-35.


37. For, if the Poets are mistaken, 
there is an old Man who cannot help going 
in and out of the house of the three Fates 
swiftly and ceaselessly, carrying
the names of all those whose lives they have cut short;
and he runs with an armful (wie het mag benijden)
to drop with a great splash into the cold river Lethe 
where they sink or are washed away.
A tale from Ariosto, taken from Il furioso, Cantos 34 & 35.


38. It seems that deer cannot trot as quickly 
as this old greybeard, back and forth. 
And along the water that receives his gifts 
screeching Vultures and Ravens are flying 
with other birds of various plumage; 
they fetch from the water, when they descend near it, 
a few among all the names, 
but quickly let them fall back in again.
This old Man you must understand to be Time.


39.  Out of many thousands of these plentiful names,
sometimes one is found worthy
and does not sink but remains on the bank, 
lying on the sand. This seems too bad to the Man, 
who wants to spare none from the river;
but against his wishes, two white swans fly and swim there
and take it away with them 
to where there is a hill to climb.
From many thousands, one will become famous through Art.


40.  On this mountain, with its beautiful buildings,
stands a temple, like that of a Goddess. 
from which emerges a Nymph or lovely Maiden
to take these names from the two faithful, 
sweet-singing swans, joyous of spirit. 
She brings these names into the Temple, 
where they are inscribed for eternity
on the Pillar bearing the exalted image.
On the Temple of Fame.


41. This fable means that death, common to all, 
is like being forgotten, that is, Lethe, 
where we will inherit a place in due course,
since the old runner will miss nobody.
But swans – that is to say, Historians and Poets –
Joyfully know how to bring some spirits
to the Nymph of immortality 
in the temple of noble Fame.
Meaning of this Fable.


42. Flatterers, tale-tellers, and sycophants 
have chosen at times to elevate
some of them in order to line their pockets,
like the Ravens and Vultures, with their rotten ways,
yet these shall stay lost in Lethe: 
namely, Men who seem born only to eat and drink, 
since they leave no other memorial of their lives.


43. Tortoises will sooner creep from their shells 
than these will stray from their old, bad intentions, 
or curb their immoderate desire 
to help themselves to good gained from the World, 
or what their Parents have gathered 
with sweat, trouble, or guile,
until they and their households
are beset with constant shame and sorrow.
It is not good Practice to squander one’s achievement. 


44. Many thousands have gone this way, 
losing their time as something futile and worthless; 
there remains in the world no more fame
than as if they had never been,
because their names remain always with the dead, 
sunk heavy as lead to the depths 
of the troubled, foul waters of Lethe, 
from which no knowledge dreams. 


45. Artists, Scholars, Monarchs and Commanders, 
in brief, have ascended to fame and esteem 
by suppressing laziness,
and hard effort and glorious acts. 
We should not get far in the world 
without the sound practice of work, 
the fruits of which provide utility, repose and joy.
The usefulness of diligence and labor.


46. Hearing this, O Youths, follow the road
of work as swiftly as possible, for the end is sweet.
Paint, draw, scribble, freely blot any sheet
of Paper as if it waits for it.  
Steal arms, legs, bodies, hands, feet –
nothing is forbidden here. Those who want to
must play the role of Rapiamus well.
Well-cooked turnips make good soup.

47. Try to escape the Poetic art of Rhetoric,
with its charming ways, however desirable and sweet.
I myself have not done a great deal to avoid it, 
but it has often deterred me 
from the path of Painting, which is to be feared.	
It is indeed a lovely flower; if it bore fruit
and provided flour ready for the Kitchen,
then the urge to use it would come. 
Rhetoric, a lovely flower without fruit, is discouraged because of the jealousy of painting.

48. In the Workshop with other apprentices, 
honor a Contract never to quarrel; 
even if you are the best, help the worse ones
maintain the tools in the Workshop.
Pay attention to the Master’s Palette and Brushes, 
to cleaning and preparing canvases and panels, 
to grinding pigments finely, to keeping them clean,
and not to temper ashes and smalts too much.

49.  Begin suckling at the pure breasts 
of the ingenious maiden who bears weapons
and came from Jupiter 's brain, as the Poets say,
then bow willingly to general opinion.
In this regard, keep company with Apelles, 
for you will often acquire something 
–when you lend a patient ear– 
which was unknown to you before.
One should also pay attention to the opinion of ordinary folk.


50.  Do not bother with the Heralds of Midas,
poor judgments which ring falsely, 
but guard yourself against the weakness of Momus.	
Even if you think there are clear mistakes
In the Master’s work, do not speak of it;
for nothing good can come of it
except mockery and defamation: your reward
will be secret resentment at the very least.
Do not bother with the bad judgment of the ignorant. 
Do not call anyone's attention to the errors of the Master.

51. You can certainly criticize a fellow student, 
but I must always insist on civility:
it will taste better to him if he is hungry. 
But do not be a flatterer or hypocrite,
Singing sweet Placebo to his face
While forcing your and then behind his back
force your throat into ugly cadences and wrong notes: 
that is, praising in his presence and insulting in his absence.
Point out mistakes to your peers with courtesy.

52. Turn away from the spirit of arrogance,
which could easily blind you to contentment
and swell the pride in your heart, 
so that from now on, satisfied with learning, 
you will rest without plowing ahead:
because he who adds contentment 
to his possession, is wonderfully happy: 
and he who is content (they say) is rich.
One should avoid arrogance.

53. Yet in our profession one must be careful
if one wants to excel in Arts,
and always strive to go farther. 
Do not blithely despise someone’s work,
For often nothing is so bad
that one cannot find in it something 
with a quality worthy of praise. As regards the rest:
what shall we say? Each does his best.
Nothing so bad that there is not sometimes good in it.

54.  Further, one should neither praise nor scorn 
oneself nor one’s own handiwork,
since praise will bring your foolishness to light
and scorn smacks of ambition;
so these paths both lead to shame.
Let good, knowledgeable people judge, 
because to praise oneself is folly,
and to despise oneself is ridiculous.
One must neither praise nor despise oneself.

55.  Many who are apt to stand at the market 
hawking one or another quack remedy 
are accustomed to boasting this way,
praising themselves and their blather
and despising others among their Peers. 
But all who shelter in the tents of Helicon
must avoid this, take heed, and resolve
not to suffer the punishment of the Pierides.

56. Whoever refreshes himself at the Hippocrene spring 
must take care not to go to his ruin
with taunts and Magpie’s chatter
like the boasting Satyr who was flayed;
lest he receive the punishment of Arachne 
who dared to compete against Minerva. 
Thus as you make your name in art, 
Guard against complacency and ambition.

57. Even if you ran along Art’s course like a Hart,
and others crawled gently like Snails, 
and if alone were assured of the Prize,
seeing few or one alongside you 
but the many following despondently behind– 
do not then be so thoughtless 
as to boast about the gifts of God, 
like Pages who sit upon their Lord’s Horses.
Whoever is inclined to Art should not boast of his gift.


58.  Do not be proud or haughty about what is lent to you 
but humbly thank the one who procures it for you
to provide for your needs, all your life, 
Because it is only to earn your living:
Art or Artist, all must perish,
However lively, however witty.
Death, making no distinctions,
pulls them with the force of his bridle
down to the depths of his dark prison.
One should thank God for His gifts. 


59. Although Art is not, like Wealth, 
subject to the course of Fortune, 
do not be too conceited about it,
for nothing lasts in this earthly vale of tears. 
Your sight, now clear, may be obscured by darkness, 
and something may afflict your Body,
which will suffer from head to toe; 
then the practice of Art is worth nothing.
What is given to us by God can be taken away.

60. So I advise, however rich you become from Art, 
always stay humble and down-to-earth,
and do not do what people foolishly do: 
If they have recently gained fleeting lucre
from some business or other,
there is often very little chance 
they will deign to be interested 
in poor acquaintances, friends or relatives.
Pride is discouraged.

61. Doing your honorable best is nothing to be scorned.7
In order not to stay stuck in the mud 
you should work hard at the proper exercise of the hand
from youth onward, and not be discouraged.
In order not to be a bungler all your life, 
avoid the playful libertine Cupid, 
the desire for lovemaking, whose purpose
is to keep Youth from the path to virtue.
Lovemaking too young is discouraged.


62. The senses scatter like hunting Dogs
who devoured the flesh of their Master for food, 
because he had seen Diana, irreparable deed.	
The ardor of Paris laid Troy, where so much
vitality could be found, to ashes.	
Thus is many a good Spirit seduced in youth 
by this blind god of Desire remains only a spark,
or drowns like a child before he knows of water.
Examples of Actaeon and Paris.


63. They judge like Paris, the most foolish of all.
The Painters’ Marriage is often of this sort:
beauty pleases their senses the most. 
Rather, pay attention, and be less hasty.
Leave Bacchus’ son Hymen with the other Gods; 
Think, it will not be so quickly forbidden.
To avoid Headaches it is good, they say,
to breakfast early and to marry late.
On the painter’s rash marriage.


64. To do things well - this cannot begin too early, 
and doing badly cannot be put off too long.
If good comes without difficulties, 
then it is precious beyond all treasures; 
its most proper use is to combat sorrow. 
But there is no need to set a time:
This can be found in Piero Mexia’s 
second Book, Chapter Thirteen. 
One cannot make a good marriage too early, or a bad one too late. 
Praise for a good marriage. 


65. There it states that the girl must be 
about ten years younger than her Spouse, 
as the mellifluous Poet Ariosto 
also declares in his Satires;
but our Painter (if no pressing matter troubles him) 
before he establishes himself well, 
should for love of Art, visit the Lands
in every corner of the World.
A Girl should be ten years younger than her Spouse at the Wedding. 

66.  I would urge you wholeheartedly to travel, 
if I did not fear that you might begin to stray.
For Rome is the city which, more than other places, 
is the destination of many Painters.
It is the principal school of Pictura, 
but it is also above all the place
where wastrels and prodigal Sons spend their fortunes;
one shrinks from allowing one’s Child to go there.
Travel to Rome is discouraged, since there is much opportunity to spend money uselessly and nothing good to earn. 

67. One also comes to know this from experience, 
since many come from there penniless.
For it is a place where error is fed,
indeed, a nest of treachery, where all evils
that spread over the world today are hatched. 
So says Petrarch, and what he says further 
about it that is worse, too long to recount here, 
is difficult to refute from truth.


68. Yet one should fall in love with the Country’s charm,
and Italus’ people, descended from Janus, 
who have always greatly exalted our art, 
are generally neither Traitors nor Thieves, 
but cultivated and overflowing with courtesy,
though with open mouth and closed fist; 
for there is almost no Nation under the Sun 
without particular faults and graces.
The nature of the Italians.

69. But if you do travel, do not let it happen 
without your desire and your Parents’ consent.
Avoid small Inns and bad company, 
take care not to be seen with much money,
and keep quiet about being on a long journey.
Be honorable and polite, make no disturbance, 
always have good money, but think twice
before lending much to your cunning Countrymen.
Instructions for young painters to put into practice while traveling.

70. Learn Peoples' customs everywhere 
to follow the good and avoid the bad.
Set forth early and also, find lodgings early,
and to avoid diseases and vermin, 
carefully examine the beds and sheets. 
But especially, never engage with 
loose Women, for apart from the sin, 
you would be defiled for your whole life.
There is much ruin from loose Women. 

71.Coming to Italy, you should sometimes, 
like the Falcon, cover your eyes
before the beautiful Circe, with all her trickery.
As for the work, it is making frescoes
Of landscapes with Grotesques,
because the Italians always suppose us 
to be good at this, and themselves, good at figures. 
I hope that we can steal their share.

72. Indeed, I trust that here I cherish no idle hope; 
they themselves see enough proof
in canvas, stone, and copper plates.	
So, Youths, take courage
although there is so far to go;
do your best, so we can reach our goal:  
that they will no longer say, in their language, 
“The Flemish cannot make figures.”
Recommended to do one’s best, so the Italians will take back their Proverb.


73. On the way back you must not be negligent; 
rather, visit Germany or another country
where there is more Money than Art, 
and (since conditions are not bad 
in the French lands) Provence, Brittany, 
all of France, Burgundy, and Spain:
everywhere one can earn 
fine Indian gold and white metal.
On the way back from Italy one should visit other countries, to come home having earned much money; then one is welcome.

74. To bring home a large quantity of coins 
from such alloys will sound good enough 
to gladden your Parents and friends. 
And when you smarten yourself up nicely and respectably,
then your arrival will be unwelcome to none; 
eople will welcome and greet you. 
Then off with the shoes, traveling is over; 
one will quickly be bound to one’s Sweetheart. 

75. Finally, remember not to return 
without having profited from going away:
bring back from Rome the correct manner of drawing, 
and good painting from the city of Venice, 
which I had to pass by for lack of time.
For I too have travelled some paths, 
which (now I’ll stop my warnings)
I shall briefly recount to you.
In Rome one learns drawing, and in Venice, painting.

76. Because of Pictura I arrived there, 
where with desire, the balm of sorrow,
I climbed over the terrifyingly high,
snow-covered Alps in Helvetia, 
and also over the hostile Apennines, 
in whose mist and dark, bad weather 
the great general Hannibal 
could not succeed in crossing.
Helvetia is Switzerland.

77.  I went so far that I saw, and lived in,
the longed-for City which was (as one may read)
begun by two Foster children of a She-wolf 
as a small town on the Palatine Hill,
and whose fame has spread throughout the World.
Ruined buildings educated me 
And asserted, with a solid argument,
how splendid Rome was in antiquity.


78.  Sometimes I traveled outside the city 
with the Italians  to practice Art. 
There I saw Cicero's Villa Tusculana, 
the old country of Latium and Alba Longa. 
Also Monte Circeo, the lofty height 
where Ulysses' men were driven into the Pigsty
(according to the Poets’ verses) 
and the Via Appia, with still more monuments.


79. I have urged myself to see, for the sake of Art,
Various Waters, worthy of mention; 
I have travelled, with uncommon discomfort,
over the salt waves of the Tyrrhenian sea. 
I also saw the wine-rich Tiber, 
a troubled torrent, and the Po, proud 
to have won a noble reputation
through an unlucky Charioteer of the Sun.


80. I observed the unsettled Arno too, 
sometimes dry, sometimes overflowing its banks;
but it cost Hannibal his eye,
seemingly from revenge, since he had tormented
the Etruscan Lands with war. 
I saw the water of Trebbia, 
where Sempronius repented, too late, of his pride, 
with great damage to the Roman army.


81. I have further sailed on two beautiful Rivers.
There are no others like them 
For they are the most important to adorn Europe. 
The first is the Danube, called Ister 
in other regions, which (as some say)
pours so powerfully into the Black Sea 
that the salt waves must part before him 
and let him sweeten the salt water for forty miles.
Herodotus in Melpomene, Book 4, considers the Danube the greatest of all rivers.


82. Next I consider the grand and useful River Rhine, 
graciously flowing through our Netherlands,
the most worthy of praise; 
I have visited these Waters 
and many honorable Cities
to understand, with better insight, the Art 
whom I now intend to depict 
with a pen, as I know her. 


83. Since in my youth I covered so much ground
to please her, for what it is worth,
she must, in recompense,
allow me to reveal her essential elements
and various Laws and customs,
to be of some service to the intention
of Aspiring and eager Minds.


84. I hope to do this according to my ability, 
and not blindly, for in order to avoid mistakes 
I have suckled at various breasts, 
invented a little, and borrowed much 
from old as well as modern writers.
For I notice that this usually the case:
that even excellent Writers 
must have fished in other Ponds.

End of the Exhortation.



