






CHAPTER II: ON DRAWING, or THE ART OF DRAWING. 
The Second Chapter.

1. One may call Drawing, or the exalted 
art of Drawing, the Father of painting;1 
and one can also praise it as the right path, 

or the door which opens to many Arts: 		fol. 8v
goldsmithing, building, and more. Indeed,
the seven liberal Arts could not live without her;
for the art of drawing, which embraces all things, 
holds all the Arts in her measured bonds.2

Drawing, the father of good painting, or: drawing is the Body and painting is its Soul.

2. She is a generous Nurse of all the arts, 
as Natalis Comes tells us.3
Yes, likewise noble and instructive Grammar,  
was raised by her and swiftly grew, 
learning from her to recognize letters and symbols
so that People of different languages 
harmoniously grasp one another’s intentions, 
whether they are near or far. 

Painting, which exists in drawing, is the nurse of all great arts and sciences. 

3. The Perfection of the art of Drawing must derive
from a solid intelligence, and the intelligence
must be built up through practice
and sustained by a natural spirit, 
which is nobly skilled at enrichment,
and by quick attentiveness. 
Thus with good judgment the Artist creates in his mind
a design of everything he is pleased to sketch by hand.4

The art of Writing is nursed by that of Drawing. 

4. This Father of Painting is a remarkable	
expression for uncovering and Clarifying
hidden ideas–indeed, the witness
to the intention, which consists
steadily in tracing, sketching and defining,
to capture everything in the World
in the range of our vision, especially
the Human figure, most magnificent creation.

What Drawing, or the art of Drawing, truly is.

5. Now Youngsters, to pursue this goal, that is,
to become competent in the art of Drawing, 
you must begin, with great dedication,
at the oval, and drawing the cross within it;  
to learn to draw a face deftly
from all sides, very important: it is disgraceful
that one sees many painters misalign the face,
laboring in vain because they ignore the cross.

Very important to understand the oval and the cross.  

6. Further, there is no shame in learning from other works
to place a figure in the proper stable position, without faltering,
on one foot, where the weight of the body rests,
as described in the chapter on Pose:
let the hip swing over the standing foot.5
Now we would be very grateful to a great Master
If he had published on your behalf, O youths,
an illustrated ABC book introducing our Art.





There ought to be a Book as an introduction for young Painters, for learning to place a Figure with ease, and thus leading to greater perfection.

7. I stand here without means, unfit for the task;
but others who have sufficient powers 
are unwilling. I fear the censure
and they, the effort. So, honorable Youth, 
you remain deprived of a useful thing. 
In the old days, now long gone, 
our art was contained in several books
that one now would search for in vain.


8. In Books, Youths in School learn 
the seven liberal Arts; young Apothecaries
and Surgeons are taught sufficiently
through writings and books not to make mistakes.
Yet for you, young Painters, there was nothing reliable
in our language, to fill you like new Vessels
with useful, edifying substance, 
from which you can preserve a strong scent.




In earlier times there was nothing written in our language for the instruction of Painters.

9. Therefore, first it would be good to find 
a good Master, to acquire a good style,6
and to learn thoroughly the solid foundations 
in design, execution, outlining, modeling, 
and the placement of light and shadows
first with Charcoal then with Chalk or Pen,
to draw the light places delicately so one can hardly see them, 
and to press harder where the shadows fall. 

It is useful for students to start with a good Master. 




Draw the light parts gently.

10. You  may do anything, hatching and washes, 
according to the inclination of your mind.
With fiery effort  you must train your hand
by copying in Charcoal and Chalk on ash grey
or pale blue Paper in order to highlight 
and darken. But take care not to let
the highlights and darks touch each other;
keep the ground color between the two. 

Drawing on colored paper is very beneficial to highlights and darkening.



Do not bring highlights and darkening next to each other.

11. Be diligent and avoid using too much highlight.
When you use colored inks or wash,
always try for a soft blending. 
Or when you work with charcoal and chalk, keep a wad
of cotton nearby,7 until the middle tones  
blend on both sides, whether you work from prints   
or from immovable plaster casts.8
Everyone likes to work as he is inclined.





Mezzotint is prepared colored ground, or half tone. 


It is good to work from prints or other methods using darkening and highlights, 
as well as from plaster casts.
Highlight has a strong effect in drawing.

12. Good prints with ground tints and effective highlights
have opened the eyes of many a mind;
for example, those of the renowned Parmigianino9 	
and others. Thus, in order to be fruitful in art,
graft to your spirit such crops as these;
Or work after something good cast in plaster, 
and note well how you place the fall of light,
because the highlights are very expressive.


13.  When through patient practice, you have made 
your hand loose without being labored,10 
and your eyes begin to gain insight,
then go from design11 to reality, that is, to life,
which is most beneficial to us, 
in which an easy grace, simple and direct, 
is manifested in both stillness and motion.
Let it be your Lodestar, guiding the ship.




One must work a great deal from life. In life there is a sure, simple ease.

14. This is the target to aim for, the foundation for building.
No Text is better to quote, 
no example is surer and finer to trust,
than the perfect nudity of Man and Woman.
The most learned Books to study
are this: to practice them endlessly, 
as well as nudes of Children, and all Animals.
Otherwise it will be impossible to draw.12 


Life: the guiding star, foundation stone, and goal of Painting.13

15. It is astonishing what grace one sees 
Nature pour forth in all directions. Here,
to our delight, can be found everything 
we might lack: gestures, composition, 
good foreshortening, contour, and substance.
Through much working and reworking, over a long time,
one becomes experienced as a worthy Master
But one must also learn to work from memory.

In life one finds everything.





One must work from memory to acquire invention.

16. Invention must also develop from youth,
otherwise we would compose poorly,
and then would have to consult another person’s work.14
We must also pay attention to proportion
as we enlarge or decrease,
and especially we must remember
what we draw, to gain more wisdom.
For you see, Memory is the mother of the Muses.






Memoria, mother of the Muses, named Mnemosyne; see Plutarch in his De liberis educandis.15

17. Further, it is the treasure-house of knowledge.
But as you copy,16 pay attention  
to placing your model correctly,
for many a Painter has committed an error
by placing it too high, too low, or too close.
Some use screens and nets,
Or frames with threads stretched cross-wise, 	Dürer engraving 
In order to prevent faults in copying.



The model–that is, the nude–which one plans to copy, should not be placed too close.

18. This is the Veil which I pass over in my chapter on composition, 
although I want to leave anyone free 
to use it, or any other materials;
for it matters not how one wants to bring his work 
to grace and to correct proportion.
Further, it greatly benefits the art of drawing
to have a good understanding
of where the Muscles begin or end 
by observing corpses being flayed.17 	

This veil is a frame with threads strung in rows, which one also draws on the paper
to place the model correctly, seeing it through the veil. 

19. It is absolutely necessary to comprehend 
the entirely of the nude figure, in every aspect,
though in so doing, one must make sure
not to depict the Muscles or Sinews 
too starkly; otherwise our Figures will seem
to waste away from scrawniness.
One should not thoughtlessly neglect
the plump and smooth softness of a living body. 



Muscles must be understood, but little in movement, unless appropriate.


20. You can stump–that is, spread chalk with a cotton swab–
or gently work it into a fine grain
without hatching, or rub it with something.
If you want to improve your art of hatching,
let your lines increase from thin to heavy,
that is, draw them from the top down,
taking care to portray the muscles or other things
as if all the Graces are there at play.18

Make hatch marks from above.

21. Pastels are made with various pigments
mixed with Glue which is half-spoiled.19
With these one can mimic the shapes of nature;
indeed, one can represent color in all figures
whether youthful or dead.
This will bring you honor,
because the art of drawing is the father of painting:
No two things can be closer together.

Pastels: how they are made.
Pastels are useful for depicting color from life.

22. In sum, the art of Drawing can be useful
to all estates, whether young or old,
indeed, princes, generals and soldiers,
whether to speak of art with knowledge in these matters
or to indicate fortifications and towns. 
Therefore the noble art of drawing is to be praised,
from which we will continue to Proportion.

The art of drawing is useful for princes, generals and soldiers for indicating cities and fortifications; see in the first volume of The Lives of the Painters how Lucius Scipio. The bother of Scipio Africanus, depicted the conquest of Carthage.20




END  OF  THE  ART  OF  DRAWING
