CHAPTER III: PROPORTION, or measure of the limbs of the human figure

1. Proportion, or pure regularity, 
is (as Plutarch tells us in this respect)
a beautiful, noble ornament in nature.1
This Proportion, in architecture or figures,
Vitruvius (always artful by nature) calls 
a constant agreement in the relation of the limbs 
or parts of the entire building, 
if properly designed according to the rules of art.2

2. For according to what he says, one can easily
compare a Human Body and a Temple.
This agrees well with the word of the Lord
when he speaks of destroying the Temple,
meaning, by the Temple, his pure Body.3
The form of a righteous man’s body 
is noble, and wondrously composed 
by Nature with particular art. 
The Human Body compared to a temple with its sections.

3. From where the hair begins to grow on the forehead
to under the chin, which we call the Face,
is the tenth part of the Body’s size 
measured in length; 
also the length of the hand, from where 
it can bend at the very end of the arm
to the end of the middle finger,
will match the length of the face.4
A person is ten faces tall, and reaches as wide as he is tall.5


4. When one measures the size of the whole 
Head, from crown to chin, one will find 
an eighth of the Body’s height; and if you stretch a thread
behind, from the crown to the base of the neck,
you will find an eighth; and from the hairline
on the forehead descending to the middle of the chest
at the point where it arches the highest, 
one will find exactly a sixth.
A Person is eight heads tall. 

5. When you increase your measure to the crown
you will observe a fourth of the Body’s height;
if you wish to find the measure of the face,
from the hairline to the eyes
above the nose and between the eyebrows
is to construct a third of the whole Face.
The nose is one part, and from the nostrils
To the base of the chin is of the same length.
A Person’s face is three noses long.


6. The foot, from where the round part of the heel begins
to the end of the second toe, truly, 
is a sixth of the body’s height;
and the cubit­–so that we understand,
the arm from the elbow joint
to the end of the longest finger– 
will always occupy a fourth of the body’s height.
Thus is the construction of the body determined.
A Person’s foot, at its longest, is a sixth of his height. A Person is four cubits tall. The Cubit of the Ancients is six palms; each palm is four thumbs long, and there are four palms to a foot. 

7. Now the chest, measured from the beginning of the stomach,
just above the navel, to up against
the chin, shows the same length. 
Put the point of a long compass on the navel,
When a person is laid out flat, 
Then let the other point draw a circle,
Then you will precisely hit the toes and fingers.   Leonardo, Vitruvian Man
A Person’s navel is his midpoint.

8. Thus the navel naturally appears to be 
the middle point of this human body, 
and just as this exquisite round form is perceived in it, 
so you can equally find a true square.
Measure amply from the crown to the soles of the feet,
And then once between the fingertips
 when the arms are outstretched,
And it will produce the same measure.
One can conceive of a Person in both a circle and a square.

9. Vitruvius has written this before me,
and note  also that Pliny agrees
that the height of a person
is exactly that of his reach; in life, 
one can also master this enough with practice.
Now there are those who have widely treated proportion in books,
especially Dürer, who is not to be bettered.  Example of Dürer’s drawing, from one of his Four Books on Human Proportions. 


10. But I have not pursued such vexations as
matters of minutes, or the divisions of thumbs,
to keep the young Painter from going so far astray.
The customs of Great Masters or Sculptors
are unsuitable trails for Youth;
I have often heard Painters say
that those who measure too much stick fast to measuring
and achieve nothing exceptional.
According to the measurements of Geometers, minutes or grains are a quarter of the width of a finger; four fingers make three thumbs. Five minutes equals one ounce; one degree is two feet.  Too many measurements are not, or at least only a little, useful for Painters, since painting well is their goal; however, measuring is necessary for Sculptors. 

11. Vitruvius, one of the wisest Giants
in the Builders’ Art, always shows a way
without the danger of getting lost.
Observe: the Young must be commanded 
to measure using heads, feet and noses:
from the Person’s head to the soles of the feet
is eight heads; each head is four noses.
I find this a quick and convenient way to measure.


12. In order to measure eight heads 
correctly and without any difficulty, you will try
to place your figure on a vertical line.
The head, from crown to chin, shall be counted as one;
From the chin to the middle between the nipples is also one eighth;
From there to the navel and further to the genitals
Makes four. The remaining four should be
The mid-thigh, the knee, mid-shin, and the sole of the foot.
Measuring the height of the body along a plumbline of the body’s center.


13. Thus you will also go to work to measure breadth.
From right to left, clothed or unclothed,
A man’s shoulders are two heads wide, the hips
are the width of two faces. Now for the female body:
The height is the same, but the width of the hips 
is exactly twice that of the head;
while the width of the shoulders
is barely two faces wide, as opposed to the man’s.

14. But women should not show hardness
in the muscles, which, as a whole, 
must softly withdraw into the face or nicely disappear, 
plump of flesh, with folds and dimples in the hands, as in children.
Now we should consider the children: 
They are five heads tall, but smaller accordingly;
three heads to the genitals,
to the thighs and calves, two.


15. You will encounter different proportions in life:
short of length, and slim. 
Children are (as Pliny tells us)
grown to half their height in three years.
Now, young painters, accept these few things.
I shall instruct you further in how to place a figure
so that it does not waver, and how to make it act and move,
in order to execute everything properly.








